# FEMA-Recommender
A MADS capstone project based on a recommendation system

# What is the subject of your proposal and what questions do you hope to answer or explore? Please introduce your topic in a brief paragraph. 
FEMA Incident Management Assistance Teams (IMAT) are the first FEMA personnel to respond to a Federally declared disaster, and are responsible for building out the Federal response in conjunction with the State, Local, Tribal or Territorial (SLTT) government.  One of the problems encountered in response operations is the volume of work required at the start of a disaster coupled with the lack of staff to perform the work.  Hours can be spent generating ideas of what mission assignments are needed, and the potential scope of the operation - let alone the actual scope as that may take days to learn.  For this project, we envision using existing data from disasters to provide a virtual 'assistant' to emergency managers in this sort of situation.  Instead of spending hours determining what is likely needed and then drafting from scratch (or a template), what if we could use machine learning and other data science tools to do some of that basic work and recommend the most likely mission assignments for that disaster and jurisdiction?  Beneficiaries could not only be FEMA IMATs, but also the SLTT emergency managers who frequently do not have much experience, staff, or knowledge of FEMA programs.
If applicable, please describe the dataset(s) you plan to use. You'll want to share the source, access method, and what features of the data you plan to explore.
FEMA mission assignments dataset: https://www.fema.gov/openfema-data-page/mission-assignments-v2
This dataset is a csv file accessed via the OpenFEMA API.  It consists of approved mission assignments from October 2012- late 2024.  These are real-world mission assignments that are recorded by type of assistance, Emergency Support Function (ESF), responsible agency, region, state, and disaster number.  We are most interested in the assistance requested, as that is the starting point for all mission assignments.
FEMA disaster declarations summary: https://www.fema.gov/openfema-data-page/disaster-declarations-summaries-v2
This dataset is a csv file that contains information about past disaster declarations, and is updated weekly by the agency.  It records the disaster number, impacted counties, state, region, and disaster type.  In addition to the disaster type for the declaration, it includes additional disasters occurring in the same area.  For instance, if a wildfire was followed by heavy rain, then flooding and landslides may be additional disasters in the declaration.  All of these types of disasters are important in understanding the mission assignments requested.

# Does your dataset have any usage restrictions? Please check for a license associated with the dataset. 
No usage restrictions.  This is Federal data that is publicly available.

# What is the minimum viable product (MVP) that you will turn in? It could be a particular set of analyses presented and interpreted in a report, a tool (like a dashboard) with a particular set of features, a predictive model or something else.
Our goal is to develop a tool that will allow a user (emergency manager) to input basic data about their disaster and receive recommended mission assignments.  Since we do not have access to the pre-scripted mission assignments available to FEMA, it will present mission assignments from similar past disasters.

# What ethical challenges or concerns do you expect to encounter in this project? If there are potential concerns, how do you plan to mitigate them?
The main ethical challenge is misleading the user as to the output.  The computer will not be initiating mission assignments nor will it output a mission assignment in final, useable form.  There is a danger that an emergency manager could potentially abdicate their decision-making to this tool.  To mitigate this, the output will include a caveat that this is a recommended assignment and not the exact assignment needed for a unique disaster.  In the real world, all mission assignments go through a multi-stage approval process, and numerous experts would have to approve it for it to be executed.

# What technical challenges do you anticipate in managing your data and analyses, if any? For example, needing to use large datasets (>1 GB), difficult data cleaning tasks, a complicated machine learning pipeline, need for specialized tools/libraries/hardware.
The data cleaning will likely be difficult, as we are using mission assignments that were written in paragraph form.  We will use NLP to categorize mission assignments and a search system to retrieve mission assignment examples based on input.  We will also try to associate specific requested assistance with disaster types and region, which presents a difficult prediction task as some regions are not very active and some disaster types occur very rarely.

# How will you evaluate the outcomes / claim success for the project?  This will depend on the type of project you hope to pursue. If you are making a model, what benchmarks will you measure it against? If you are investigating a hypothesis, what analyses and visuals will you need to present to make your case? If you are making a tool, what features must be ready by the end of class? 
The tool needs to have the ability to take input, such as keywords for disaster type, state, region and number of counties and output recommended mission assignment types and examples that are relevant.

# Will your project require any cloud computing tools (Google Colab, AWS, GCP)? 
Google Colab or Deepnote might be used for collaborative coding. Google Colab might be used if we require a GPU at some point. Ideally, we will be relying on GitHub branches for pull requests and code reviews. We may need to utilize Google Drive to store databases and/or indexes that we build if they are too large to store on GitHub.
